### The Piety of Walls and Scattered Corn: George Herbert's Christian Rhetoric

George Herbert's work has not traditionally been understood as offering a contribution to communications scholarship or the rhetorical tradition. Instead, on the strength of his best-known writing---his poetry---Herbert has been uniformly classed as a subject of study for literary scholars. However, given recent calls in these pages for a richer account of Christian rhetorical theory, Herbert's rhetorical work bears looking at again. In his handbook for priests, *The Country Parson,* Herbert offers subtle and powerful resources for a developing a Christian rhetorical theory grounded in the doctrine of the incarnation. Combining Augustinian preaching theory with what Kenneth Burke calls an “administrative” rhetoric, Herbert's rhetoric for the preacher models a Christian rhetorical theory wedding robust powers of eloquence to orthodox Christian faith.

My argument here builds upon Kenneth R. Chase's defense of the relationship between a strong theory of rhetoric and creedal Christianity. Where it might seem that orthodox Christianity, with its emphasis upon doctrinal truth, ought to side with philosophy in questioning the value of rhetoric's probabilistic reasoning, in fact, Chase argues that a Christianity that takes seriously the doctrine of incarnation will be soaked in rhetoric. Chase insists that "Christ's enfleshment overturns the binary logic that has haunted the tradition of rhetoric for centuries."[^fn1] Because Jesus Christ, the divine Word, was incarnate in material form, himself in order to make a persuasive appeal, Christian truth is necessarily rhetorical. Christian rhetors emulate Christ in speaking the truth in persuasive form. Rather than siding with *either* Plato's concern for truth *or* Cicero's rhetorical practice, Christian faith unites philosophy and rhetoric in the incarnate truth of Christ. With this theological rationale in place for the Christian practice of rhetoric, Chase calls for "not only additional scriptural and theological reflection, but also a more complete examination of early Church fathers and other writers from the last 1500 years of Church history."[^fn2] My essay answers that call, offering Herbert as one valuable resource for this new history of Christian rhetoric.

Understanding Herbert's rhetorical contribution will not only help us expand the scope of a robust Christian rhetoric, but allows for an expanded conception of the place of religious rhetoric in the rhetorical tradition at large. Almost the sole source for a critical sacred rhetoric is Burke’s *The Rhetoric of Religion: Studies in Logology*, yet this work has some key insufficiencies that understanding Herbert can help us redress.[^1] In particular, Burke’s work has the limitation of a narrow focus on religious language: Burke opens the book by stating he will focus on “the necessarily verbal nature of religious doctrines.”[^fn2a] Although language is certainly crucial to how religions construct themselves rhetorically, it is not hard to see that other, nonlinguistic elements are always shaping religion as well: bodies, churches, rituals, bread, wine. Furthermore, for Burke religious rhetoric is grounded in “complex theories of transcendence,” leading to his attempt to understand religious rhetorical moves through their reference to notions of order leading to a transcendent being.[^fn3a] Again, although this approach has explanatory power for key aspects of religion—particularly formal theology—since religion is always a social phenomenon, to explain the community-building aspects of a religion in terms of pure reference to transcendence seems reductive. Religion is a social phenomenon as well as a metaphysical system, and so matters of (for example) ethics and of community life are also essential. For this reason, Burke’s system is an awkward fit for much sacred rhetoric. Herbert can help us correct this awkwardness if we understand the rhetorical value of his work, in particular his writing on the role of the parson.

Appropriating Herbert as a corrective to Burke and source for Christian rhetoric, however, will require retrieving *The Country Parson* as a work of rhetorical theory. Despite Herbert’s unique contribution to rhetorical thought, *The Country Parson* has not been included in the canon of rhetorical theory, nor has it been discussed by scholars of rhetoric. Neither of the two most important guides to the rhetorical tradition mention it: George A. Kennedy’s *Classical Rhetoric and its Christian and Secular Tradition from Ancient to Modern Times* ignores it, and Patricia Bizzell and Bruce Herzberg’s anthology *The Rhetorical Tradition* does not include it. Similarly, the most recent history of Renaissance rhetoric, by Peter Mack, makes no mention of Herbert’s treatise, despite a dedicated chapter on preaching theory. Deborah K. Shuger, in *Sacred Rhetoric: the Christian Grand Style in the English Renaissance*, at least treats *The Country Parson* as a contribution to rhetoric, but because Herbert is not concerned with grand style, the work comes in for little analysis in her text (94-95).[^fn6] All in all, scholars of rhetoric utterly neglect Herbert and *The Country Parson*.

Despite neglect of Herbert on the part of historians of rhetoric, we do have one treatment of *The Country Parson* that finds some rhetorical potential within Herbert's work, in a treatment of the text by Stanley Fish. Though Fish gets closest of any scholar to making *The Country Parson* useful for rhetorical thought, ultimately he limits the rhetorical value of Herbert's thought. For Fish, Herbert’s ideal parson is the consummate rhetor: “He is never himself alone; he is always in the act of composing himself, that is, of putting together or constructing the role he will then play.”[^fn14] The duty of Herbert’s parson is to act out his duty, to rhetorically construct his ethos, in order to lead others to a similar rhetorical construction of themselves. Fish grants that his thoroughly rhetorical treatment of *The Country Parson* “could be read as a severe criticism of Herbert, indeed as an accusation of hypocrisy,” yet he claims that this insincerity in fact reflects Herbert’s Christian desire for “self-immolation.”[^fn14] That is, “What Herbert sees is that, in relation to the mode of life for which the Christian yearns—a reunion with the will of God—sincerity, the claim of saying and doing what *you* mean, is the greatest temptation.”[^fn15] In Fish’s reading, Herbert’s Christian faith is predicated upon a kind of rhetorical construction of the self—not an authentic self, but a self made in the image of God. In so far as Fish thoroughly rhetoricizes Herbert’s Christian faith, his work presents a valuable starting point for integrating *The Country Parson* into the rhetorical tradition. Unfortunately, in his characteristically provocative way Fish must go further, and in so doing he badly damages the usefulness of his analysis. As he explores how Herbert describes the pastor relating to his parishioners, Fish sees the pastor as engaging in a kind of Foucauldian Panoptic surveillance.[^fn16] Though Fish disclaims any desire to engage in a moral critique of Herbert’s rhetoricity, by concluding his piece with a focus on “the darkness and terror of Herbert’s vision,” he cedes ground to the old critique that a thoroughgoing rhetoric can only be pernicious.[^3] Fish remains comfortable with Herbert’s rhetoricity insofar as it shapes the pastor’s own attitudes, but when it extends to persuasive—which is after all the traditional goal of rhetoric—he pulls back.[^4] Ultimately, then, Fish’s work represents an insufficiently robust rhetoric of *The Country Parson.*

In contrast to Fish's critique and the neglect of the rhetoricians, *The Country Parson* has much to offer as a rhetorical text. The book combines elements of the courtesy book[^fn4a] with consideration of preaching and other persuasive actions that ought to be taken by the priest serving a country parish. In his note to the reader, Herbert states that he aims “to set down the Form and Character of a true Pastour, that I may have a Mark to aim at: which also I will set as high as I can, since hee shoots higher that threatens the Moon, then hee that aims at a Tree.”[^fn4a] His task, then, is to develop a descriptive treatment of the ideal pastor in order to orient pastoral practice towards excellence. This descriptive focus on an idealized figure sets *The Country Parson* within the “ideal orator” tradition of rhetorical treatises, a tradition initiated by Cicero’s *De Oratore* (the title of which James M. May and Jakob Wisse translate as *On the Ideal Orator*) and receiving another famous treatment in book 12 of *The Orator’s Education* with the notion of the “vir bonus dicendi peritus,” the good man speaking well.[^fn5a] Furthermore, Herbert’s background as former public orator and professor of rhetoric at Cambridge demonstrates that whether or not he mirrored the ideal orator tradition consciously, he was well acquainted with rhetorical thought.[^2] Therefore, if it can be shown that Herbert makes a distinctive contribution to the rhetorical tradition, he ought to be considered as operating within it.

<!---- FOOTNOTE THESE SOURCES SOMEHOW Herbert’s rhetorical thought does receive some consideration from literary critics, yet these treatments are unsatisfactory either because they deal primarily with his poetry, or because they render *The Country Parson* less than useful for contemporary rhetorical scholarship. For example, Helen Wilcox writes about “the Poetry of a Cambridge Orator,” attempting to explain “why Herbert’s poems and the very idea of oratory have been (and to some extent still are) kept separate in the minds of readers and critics.”[^fn9] Wilcox analyzes how Herbert’s poetry depicts and discusses oratory, and in so doing, she sketches some of Herbert’s attitudes towards rhetoric, but does not contribute directly to any analysis of his preceptive theory of rhetoric. Kenneth J. E. Graham goes further in developing Herbert’s rhetoric from an analysis of his poetry, though without mention of *The Country Parson*. Graham argues that Herbert’s poems, in response to Reformation debates about biblical interpretation, manifest “a rhetorical hermeneutics that harmonizes apparently contradictory texts by reading for their writers’ intentions rather than for their literal, uncontextualized truth.”[^fn10] Much like Wilcox, then, Graham successfully points out attitudes about rhetoric in Herbert’s poetry, but does not elaborate on his rhetorical theory *per se*. In this regard, Stanley Fish perhaps furthest among rhetorically-minded critics of Herbert’s poetry. Fish’s always-rhetorical mode of criticism lends itself well to an understanding of Herbert’s poetry as itself rhetorical, rather than merely reflecting attitudes about rhetoric. Fish read’s Herbert’s work as a “catechistical poetry” representing “a sincere effort on the part of the poet-catechist to change his reader-pupil’s mind.”[^fn11] Though this is an admirably rhetorical understanding of the poetry, because it is exclusively concerned with Herbert’s verse, its usefulness for rhetorical theory is debatable. So although numerous critics find valuable rhetorical material in Herbert’s poetry, this work does us little good in putting Herbert’s *Country Parson* to use in the rhetorical tradition. ----!>

<!---- Other critics get us closer to seeing Herbert as a contributor to rhetoric by focusing their analysis on *The Country Parson* itself, yet the most prominent treatments of the book do not manage to render it available for rhetorical use. Perhaps the most wide-ranging treatment of the book, Ronald W. Cooley’s *“Full of all knowledg”: George Herbert’s *Country Parson *and Early Modern Social Discourse*, does much to situate the treatise in its historical context, but does not take up rhetoric. Instead, Cooley examines how the treatise records, responds to, and promotes the emergence of the modern in early modern England, as modernity is expressed in worship, social regulation, agricultural technology and land use, and domestic relations."[^fn12] True to his subtitle, Cooley’s emphasis is squarely on social matters rather than rhetorical theory. Although Cooley’s work is thus valuable for any understanding of Herbert’s text in general, it does not reveal the work as a rhetoric, leaving the text without a serious rhetorical analysis.[^fn13] ----!>

I will thus demonstrate that *The Country Parson* is thoroughly rhetorical, yet---drawing on Chase's incarnational view of rhetoric---without assuming a view of rhetoric as either sinister or coercive. It is true that Herbert himself may have had some reservations about rhetoric. Helen Wilcox points out that some of Herbert’s poetry can be read as evincing a “poetic distrust” of rhetoric, with its excessive showiness and “enchanting” power.[^fn17] Yet Wilcox argues that Herbert resolves his distrust of the subject by understanding Jesus Christ as the ultimate orator, and the Bible as “a potential source of inspiration for rhetorical modes and models of oration.”[^fn18] Herbert’s concerns about rhetoric in a religious context thus end in a sanctification of the subject by appealing to precisely the incarnate Christ who grounds Chase's understanding of Christian rhetoric. Furthermore, in questioning rhetoric’s value and resolving it through an appeal to the Bible as model, Herbert identifies himself with another powerful and thoroughgoing rhetoric, and one which exercises greater influence over the rhetoric of religion than any other source. Herbert’s resolution of the problem of rhetoric mirrors Augustine’s resolution of the same problem in *De Doctrina Christiana* (hereafter *DDC*), arguably the founding text of the Christian preaching tradition. Understanding the parallels between *The Country Parson* and *DDC*, both in how the two books handle concerns about rhetoric and how they envision the preacher, will allow us to begin situating Herbert’s place as a contributor to sacred rhetoric, a rhetoric that need not be understood as grounded in "darkness and terror."

***

Herbert’s resolution of the problem of rhetoric, as Wilcox understands it, looks a lot like how Augustine deals with the same problem. Augustine, too, can seem highly ambivalent about rhetoric at some points. Book IV of *DDC* is the section of his work most commonly discussed as part of the rhetorical tradition, yet Augustine begins the book by disclaiming its connection to rhetoric, stating that whoever wants to learn rhetorical tricks can learn them elsewhere (IV.1-2).[^fn19] In claiming his distance from rhetoric, Augustine distances himself from both classical rhetoric and the sophists of his own day.[^fn20] We might thus read Augustine to be displaying a basic suspicion of rhetoric as a neutral tool which can be turned to good or evil ends, a tool which the Christian must learn only so that the enemy does not gain “a dangerous advantage” through its pernicious use.[^fn21] However, Augustine ultimately sanctifies rhetoric by the same move employed by Herbert in *The Country Parson*—grounding rhetoric in a divine source—suggesting Herbert’s conscious or unconscious debt to *DDC*.[^5] In *DDC* III.38.85, Augustine characterizes Scripture as having eloquence (*eloquiis*), one of the terms used in describing rhetoric in Book Four (see IV.27.74, for example). The Bible itself then has its own sort of sanctified rhetoric, one that the preacher can draw upon freely. For Augustine, the preacher’s task is to exposit the Bible, and the rhetoric of the Bible offers him a wholly licit source for his own rhetorical performance. Ultimately, then, for both Augustine and Herbert the rhetoric of the preacher is above reproach insofar as it draws on Scripture.

The comparison between *The Country Parson* and *DDC *grows stronger when we look at how each treats the rhetorical moves characteristic of the preacher. Both Augustine and Herbert advocate a rhetoric for the preacher which relies heavily on the preacher’s ethos as expressed through the totality of his Christian life. Herbert spends a good portion of the early part of his text focused on the parson’s lifestyle, stating in his definition of the pastor that “a Priest is to do that which Christ did, and after his manner, both for Doctrine and Life” (p. 225). Only after taking up how the parson “is exceeding exact in his Life” does Herbert proceed to his rhetorical work as a preacher and minister (p. 227). In this structure, Herbert illustrates the link between the preacher’s life and his rhetorical effectiveness summarized so aptly in “The Windows”:

> Doctrine and life, colours and light, in one
> > When they combine and mingle, bring
> A strong regard and aw : but speech alone
> > Doth vanish like a flaring thing,
> > And in the eare, not conscience ring. (p. 68)

Although Wilcox reads this passage as demonstrating a suspicion of rhetoric *per se*, we might just as easily understand it as advocating a certain kind of rhetoric, in which the preacher’s true effectiveness depends upon the thoroughly rhetorical concept of ethos. Producing “a strong regard and awe,” after all, is a rhetorical effect, and it is one created, in Herbert’s estimation, by a rhetoric which includes the preacher’s own life, his full-bodied ethos. Herbert need not be read her as disavowing rhetoric, his area of expertise, but rather as emphasizing the ethotic quality of preaching.

Similarly, Augustine argues that when possible the preacher “should choose to satisfy his audience with things rather than words,” that is, with the example of his life rather than his rhetoric.[^fn25] This is a highly expansive notion of ethos, which expands the appeal from covering merely how the preacher *presents* himself to an audience in a speech situation, to the whole of the preacher’s life. Without a whole life constructed rhetorically to be appealing and Christlike, Augustine and Herbert say, the preacher cannot be rhetorically effective.

A final point of contact between *The Country Parson* and *DDC* can be found in their treatment of audience. Augustine insists that the preacher’s task is to “build up [the] double love of God and neighbour,” and in so doing to help his audience toward their greater sanctification.[^fn26] Furthermore, he insists that the preacher should not try to impress the audience with his perspicuity, but that he should restrict his exegesis to points that are accessible to the hearers.[^fn27] Throughout *DDC*, Augustine’s emphasis remains on presenting an accessible, useful, and charity-building interpretation of Scripture through preaching.

Herbert’s description of the parson’s relationships to his congregation bears this same Augustinian emphasis on doing service to the audience. For Herbert, it is incumbent upon the parson to draw illustrations and examples from the rural world of his parishioners: the parson “condescends even to the knowledge of tillage, and pastorage, and makes great use of them in teaching, because people by what they understand, are best led to what they understand not” (p. 228). Sermons in a rural church thus ought to draw on the rural context for their examples and illustrations. They should not be an opportunity for the preacher to show his academic prowess, but should reflect the concerns of the audience. For Herbert, as for Augustine, the preacher must take care to make himself understood before he shows off his learning. Moreover, Herbert gives much of his treatise over to how the parson should concern himself directly with the lives of his flock through such actions as hospitality (Chapter XI) and giving alms (Chapter XII). He explicitly ties such activities to preaching in his catalogue of what the parson is to do on Sundays: after leading the church service, he is to spend the remainder of day “either in reconciling neighbours that are at variance, or in visiting the sick, or in exhortations to some of his flock by themselves, whom his Sermons cannot, or doe not reach” (p. 236). The preacher’s rhetoric thus extends to his actions outside the divine service, and encompasses actions of reconciliation or outreach to the parish at large. As for Augustine, for Herbert the preacher should not seek to sway his audience for his own benefit, but should instead attempt to do them good both through speech and action, with all of these aspects of his life and ministry working in conjunction. The Augustinian rhetoric employed by Herbert bases its language and theology in a concern for the persons and lives of the preacher and the congregation.

Herbert’s appropriation of these Augustinian rhetorical traits demonstrates the first crucial way in which his rhetoric of religion can be said to offer an improvement on Burke. The rhetoric of religion as Burke understands it, is primarily concerned with language and theology, as I have already shown. Burke’s project explores theological language for its own sake as the structure of religion. In contrast, the Augustinian rhetoric employed by Herbert bases its language and theology in a concern for the persons and lives of the preacher and the congregation. Grasping the structure of religious language and theological persuasion is not sufficient to understand the pastoral and personal concerns which Augustine and Herbert insist the preacher must take up. Herbert thus serves as a valuable study in how Burke’s rhetoric of religion falls short.

We might take this analysis further, though, by adopting a concept from Burke’s work on secular rhetoric: the notion of an “administrative rhetoric” which accomplishes its persuasive goals not just through language, but through material action. Considering Herbert’s treatise only in relation to Augustine might leave us with the idea that Herbert’s concern with the personal is only to draw on embodied life to create persuasive power in the sermon or testimony—pastoral concern as sermon material. Such an approach would not ultimately escape the problems of Burke’s excessively linguistic rhetoric of religion, for it would merely accomplish a reduction of personal, bodily concerns to the linguistic. Moreover, if Herbert’s concern with the personal only existed to fuel discursive persuasion, his rhetoric could be easily understood by reference to Burke’s theories of transcendence, for his personal concerns might only be material to be placed within the transcendent structure of religious doctrine. Showing how Herbert adopts an administrative rhetoric, however, will demonstrate how his rhetoric’s treatment of personhood goes much further in tying itself to mundane and non-transcendent matters.

Burke employs the concept of “administrative rhetoric” in a discussion of Machiavelli, arguing that “*The Prince* can be treated as a rhetoric insofar as it deals with *the producing of effects upon an audience.*”[^fn30] For Burke, Machiavelli’s Prince goes through various efforts to produce a certain impression upon his subjects or his fellow princes, and since these efforts—no matter how little they look like oratory—have a persuasive purpose, they can be understood as rhetorical. In Burke’s administrative rhetoric, “the persuasion cannot be confined to the strictly verbal; it is a mixture of symbolism and definite empirical operations.”[^fn31] The Prince’s rhetorical efforts may well include speeches, but they may also include wars, negotiations, patronages—since for Machiavelli, all these actions have the effect of building up the Prince’s persuasive powers. Unfortunately, Burke never extends this concept of nonverbal, administrative rhetoric to religion, yet Herbert shows that sacred rhetoric need not be verbal and may well be administrative.

Analyzing Herbert’s description of the parson’s concern for his congregation has already provided some idea of the administrative concerns of his rhetoric, yet we can go further. Herbert’s treatise presents numerous ways for the parson to turn nonverbal things to his rhetorical advantage in appealing to his congregation. His marital status must depend upon “the temper of his Parish,” such that he will seek out a wife if “he may have occasion to converse with women, and that among suspicious men” (p. 237). Even the parson’s body is thus governed by the imperative to appeal to the flock, as he should not enter into a romantic relationship without considering his flock. Herbert follows this discussion of the pastor’s romantic affairs with a discussion of the pastor’s household, which is among the longer chapters in the book. In this chapter he describes not only how the pastor should observe his religion at home, but how he should be thrifty, what kinds of food he ought to eat, and how he ought to care for his health. All of the household, though, is to serve his vocation as a minister: he says of the parson’s family and servants that “in the house of a Preacher, all are preachers" (p. 240). His wife and family ought to support his ministry and he is responsible for giving them religious education; so, too, with his servants, “so that his family is a School of Religion” (p. 240). Nonhuman objects have a prominent place in this chapter: Herbert talks about money (charitable giving should not be seen as depriving his children); gardens and orchards (essential for the parson’s budget); “crumbs, and scattered corn”[^fn35]; “rheum” and phlegm (arising from fasting mishandled); beer, fish, roots, and bitter herbs (good for the stomach). The parson’s persuasive work thus involves him in mundane matters of household management, which are by no means below his notice, but serve a vital role in his ministry. Herbert’s insistence that even the nonhuman preaches on the parson’s behalf extends even to this compelling bit of anthropomorphism: “Even the walls are not idle, but something is written, or painted there, which may excite the reader to a thought of piety,” such as the text of Psalm 101 (p. 240). The pastor’s body and all the bodies of his household—human and nonhuman—thus all contribute to an administrative rhetoric aimed at building up his flock.

Herbert’s administrative rhetoric for the parson extends as well from the parson’s household to his action throughout the parish, as the parson is admonished to visit his parishioners regularly, provide services to them and support the local order. These actions are to be taken in order to produce pastoral effects among his parishioners, that he may bless, admonish, commend, instruct and guide for “higher purposes” (p. 249). An administrative rhetoric, the production of effects through physical action, thus makes up no small part of the parson’s work. These administrative efforts are the elements of Herbert’s treatise which Fish finds so chilling, redolent of a “dependence and manipulation that everyone is forced to enact.”[^fn38] Yet however little Fish or any modern reader may agree with the admittedly socially conservative program of Herbert’s pastor, to turn from defending Herbert’s rhetorical selfhood to attacking the “manipulation” of his persuasive efforts seems disingenuous. The parish priest in Herbert’s time by no means held any absolute authority to exercise physical or legal force among his flock: even if, as Cooley points out, the clerical profession was emerging as an instrument of “social control,” its status remained very much contested.[^fn40] Therefore, we must understand Herbert’s administrative rhetoric precisely as a rhetoric, a technique of persuasion rather than compulsion, and as such no more or less problematic than the other elements of Herbert’s rhetorical theory.

A defense of Herbert’s administrative rhetoric is crucial to my project here—and thus merits my repeated harangue against Fish—since it gives me the best means to develop Herbert’s thought in contrast the second insufficiency in Burke’s rhetoric of religion. Whereas Burke reads all religious persuasion as structured by “complex theories of transcendence,” Herbert’s administrative rhetoric is much more mundane, yet still thoroughly religious.[^fn41] Though Herbert admittedly encourages the parson to strive after “higher purposes,” the structure of his rhetoric is entirely pragmatic and enmeshed with mundane objects. Even in his directions for the care of the church, Herbert’s directions read more like a training manual than an ecclesiology: the pastor should take care “that all things be in good repair; as walls plastered, windows glazed, floore paved, seats whole, firm, and uniform . . . . Secondly, that the Church be swept, and kept cleane without dust, or Cobwebs, and at great festivals strawed, and stuck with boughs, and perfumed with incense” (p. 246). Herbert’s justification for this mundane list of physical duties is biblical, citing St. Paul in 1 Cor. 14, but also rhetorical, claiming that the cleanliness of the church is “for the benefit of our neighbor” (p. 246). Similarly, when Herbert advocates that the parson gain medical knowledge, he does so with a radically heterogeneous blend of theological and practical wisdom. He advises the parson to grow an herb garden, “wherein the manifold wisedome of God is wonderfully to be seen,” and which is also “more easie for the Parsons purse” than purchasing drugs (p. 261). In every part of Herbert’s rhetoric, then, religion is understood not simply through reference to a complex order of transcendence, but also with a mundane entanglement with bodies, objects and pragmatic action. Herbert’s rhetoric of religion is thus both transcendent and mundane, concerned with divine order and with the everyday life of the parish on its own terms.

Though this may make him seem all too bourgeois—or perhaps, as in Fish, repressive—in contrast with a religion of sublime experience, it also has the salutary effect of rendering Herbert’s thought valuable for current rhetorical thought in concern with materiality. Whereas Burke is best understood as a progenitor of the linguistic turn of the latter part of the twentieth century, a more current wave of critical interest takes up the persuasive importance of *objects*: having spent much of the last fifty years concerned with the transcendent order of language, scholars seem to be ready to get back into the nitty-gritty realm of the material.[^fn46] Herbert’s pragmatic and mundane rhetoric of religion thus offers a compelling resource for ongoing rhetorical thought.

[^fn1]: {chasekennethr.ChristianRhetoricalTheory2013}, p. 34.

[^fn2]: {chasekennethr.ChristianRhetoricalTheory2013}, p. 43.

[^1]: For an overview of religion and rhetoric, including a clear indication of how the field is dominated by Burke, see Margaret D. Zulick, “Rhetoric of Religion: a Map of the Territory,” *The SAGE Handbook of Rhetorical Studies*, ed. Andrea A. Lunsford (Los Angeles: SAGE, 2009), 125-38.

[^2]: See Wilcox for an overview of Herbert’s career as orator.

[^3]: { | Fish, Stanley, et al., 1999 | | |zu:321843:FEIAT3DI}, p. 47. On the long history of critics of rhetoric attacking the discipline for its relativism, immoral influence on others, and susceptibility to evil uses, see { | Lanham, Richard A., 1995 | | |zu:321843:KEJVP3WY}, pp. 154-194.

[^4]: In his desire to deflate “the piety that has always characterized Herbert studies” (p. 50), Fish connects Herbert’s pastor to Reformation arguments which validated torture by an appeal to the divine. After citing a particularly horrifying such validation by Martin Luther, Fish concedes: “In comparison to this, the discipline of the God of Herbert’s parson, working as he does largely on grain and ships, seems almost tame” (p. 49). I would suggest that the parson’s discipline might “seem” more tame than torture because it *is *more tame. Dropping by parishioner’s houses when they don’t expect you is hardly the rack.

[^5]: My main concern here is not to establish a link between Augustine and Herbert, yet it should be noted that *DDC* exercised massive influence throughout the Middle Ages and into the early modern period, it is unlikely that Herbert could have gone through his education in rhetoric and divinity without encountering Augustine. For more on the breadth of Augustine’s influence, see Edward D. English, ed. *Reading and Wisdom: the *De Doctrina Christiana *of Augustine in the Middle Ages* (Notre Dame, Ind.: U of Notre Dame P, 1995).

[^fn2a]: { | Burke, Kenneth, 1961 | | |zu:321843:ENCNGFUJ}, p. 1

[^fn3a]: { | Burke, Kenneth, 1961 | | |zu:321843:ENCNGFUJ}, p. 5.

[^fn4a]: E.g., Baldesar Castiglione's *The Book of the Courtier*; see { | Wolberg, Kristine A., 2008 | | |zu:321843:H4EASINY}, p. 14.

[^fn4a]: { | Herbert, George, & F. E. Hutchinson, 1941 | | |zu:321843:9KX7ID5Y}, p. 224. All subsequent quotations from Herbert also derive from this edition, and are referred to in my text by page number.

[^fn5a]: { | Quintilian, & Donald A. Russell, 2001 | | |zu:321843:JNGB7C52}, 12.1.1.

[^fn6]: { | Shuger, Debora K., 1988 | | |zu:321843:UY7CFZP5}, p. 94-95.

[^fn9]: { | Wilcox, Helen, 2004 | | |zu:321843:FQRBRF56}, p. 53.

[^fn10]: { | Graham, Kenneth J. E., 2005 | | |zu:321843:AJQBXXXA}, p. 184.

[^fn11]: { | Fish, Stanley, 1978 | | |zu:321843:4CB8U38K}, pp. 25, 26.

[^fn12]: { | Cooley, Ronald W., 2004 | | |zu:321843:G3U652HB}, p. 5.

[^fn13]: Similarly, Wolberg’s reading of *The Country Parson* restricts its treatment of Herbert’s text to examining the generic characteristics of the clerical manual and the courtesy book: see { | Wolberg, Kristine A., 2008 | | |zu:321843:H4EASINY}, p. 14.

[^fn14]: { | Fish, Stanley, et al., 1999 | | |zu:321843:FEIAT3DI}, p. 39.

[^fn14]: { | Fish, Stanley, et al., 1999 | | |zu:321843:FEIAT3DI}, p. 40.

[^fn15]: { | Fish, Stanley, et al., 1999 | | |zu:321843:FEIAT3DI}, p. 41.

[^fn16]: { | Fish, Stanley, et al., 1999 | | |zu:321843:FEIAT3DI}, p. 44.

[^fn17]: { | Wilcox, Helen, 2004 | | |zu:321843:FQRBRF56}, p. 59.

[^fn18]: { | Wilcox, Helen, 2004 | | |zu:321843:FQRBRF56}, p. 60.

[^fn19]: { | Augustine, & Green, 1996 | | |zu:321843:IQJAVNAI}, IV.1-2.

[^fn20]: See { | Sutherland, Christine Mason, 2004 | | |zu:321843:XR2ASY7Z}, pp. 1-2.

[^fn21]: { | Sutherland, Christine Mason, 2004 | | |zu:321843:XR2ASY7Z}, p. 1.

[^fn25]: { | Augustine, & Green, 1996 | | |zu:321843:IQJAVNAI}, IV.61.155.

[^fn26]: { | Augustine, & Green, 1996 | | |zu:321843:IQJAVNAI}, I.40.86.

[^fn27]: { | Augustine, & Green, 1996 | | |zu:321843:IQJAVNAI}, IV.23.63.

[^fn30]: { | Burke, Kenneth, 1969 | | |zu:321843:DQ87GTD4}, p. 158.

[^fn31]: { | Burke, Kenneth, 1969 | | |zu:321843:DQ87GTD4}, p. 161.

[^fn35]: Good for feeding poultry and swine, p. 241.

[^fn38]: { | Fish, Stanley, et al., 1999 | | |zu:321843:FEIAT3DI}, p. 17.

[^fn40]: { | Cooley, Ronald W., 2004 | | |zu:321843:G3U652HB}, p. 57.

[^fn41]: { | Burke, Kenneth, 1961 | | |zu:321843:ENCNGFUJ}, p. 5.

[^fn46]: See, for instance, { | Bogost, 2012 | | |zu:321843:9KQ8IGAT}.
